Optimizing physics.
In this video, we'll take a look at a real world example of physics.
We'll experiment with some optimizations.
Finally, we'll improve on the performance dramatically.
So let's optimize.
I created a demo with many instances of the same chain object.
You can see here I'm spawning about 20,000.
The current performance is very low.
It's around three frames per second on my laptop.
You might see different performance, of course, depending what machine you're on.
Let's set a goal for ourselves to get performance around 60 frames per second.
We'll see what we can do to optimize it.
Let's take a look at the demo.
We'll use the optimized physics begin scene.
We'll play the scene and then we'll iterate on optimizations, will continually check the frame rate
and see how we do.
All right, let's jump into the project.
So we're looking at the optimized begin scene.
What I have set up here is a series of links from a chain.
It's not a chain with joints.
I'm just using those pieces.
And if I open this window up a little bit more Unity has some stats.
With the statistics, we can see that as these pieces are falling and interacting with the flaw in each
other.
We're getting a frame rate around 2.8 to 3 frames per second, so this is very low.
Let's shoot for a target of something like 60 frames a second.
See what kinds of changes we can make.
So the scene setup is pretty simple.
There's a floor.
Then I have a in here, which I'm using to create about 20,000 objects, which is a lot.
Then I have a scene.
Game object set up called Optimized Physics setup.
It's a bunch of stuff that's comments or code that's commented out.
Let's step through each of them.
First of all, as testing advice, this doesn't really make it a more efficient project, but it gives
us better frame rate readout in that screen UI.
We just set the V Sync count to zero.
So for the optimization itself, the first big step is always upgrade unity to the latest public version.
If you can, you're going to get better performance because unity is always updating their whole system
of rendering and physics, etc. so you get really great results.
Secondly, while you're testing, if the frame rate is very important to you, consider building to
your end device, whether it's a windows build or building it on iOS or Android and testing it closer
to the end users experience, you'll get performance that is either better or more close to what the
user will get, which is of course, important benchmark.
Let's start with some of the stuff that we can do within the project.
Number three, we can go ahead and turn the shadows off in the scene.
We can also set the floor in the scene to static, which is a physics change.
We can go to the thing prefab and we can set its mesh collider off and use a primitive like a box collider
instead.
Let's do those three steps and see what kinds of changes we get.
So first of all, with the lighting.
We've got a hard shadows which are.
More efficient than the soft shadows.
But let's try no shadows.
Let's see if we get any effect here.
So just we're going to step through in Some of these things might make a good difference, and some
of them might not.
So what we do is a mouse click here to kick off the spinner and.
At least in the beginning.
I mean, with more time, it's going to slow down because there's more and more calculations.
But I think it might be a little bit better.
We're hovering closer to three than we were before, so consider that an option.
Your game, of course, may require shadows.
Maybe you can't do that.
But I just want to point out there's a non physics kind of go to solution there.
The next thing we're going to look at is setting the simple floor, which is under everything, setting
it to static.
In just doing that may optimize the rigid body, may be able to work more efficiently.
So let's take a look.
So remember, we were getting about three in the best.
Here.
It's more or less the same.
It's possible that there's little changes, but that's something to check out.
If you had more objects, setting more of them static would be good.
Next, let's look at the thing prefab.
So let's take this and bring it out into the world and zoom in.
And we can see here we've got a mesh collider on there.
So if we turn off the mesh collider and instead add a box collider and we can see that the box collider
does a pretty good job of estimating its shape anyway.
Of course, the corners are not round anymore and depending on our game project that might actually
matter, might give us a different enough physics result.
So now that I've made that change and saved it into the prefab, let's see how that works.
So I click my mouse to give it a start.
It's hovering around three.
Then that that may not have made a big difference here.
So I'm just going to double check actually that that is indeed a change has been done.
I have a box collider.
The mesh collider is off.
I'm going to remove the mesh Collider.
I don't know if that even makes a difference, but.
Even though it was toggled off, because I'm surprised we're not getting a little bit of a frame jump
there, a little bit of improvement.
And it doesn't look like that's made a big difference.
But maybe in your project it would.
Let's go to the next steps.
Here.
There's several different time values that we're going to be able to tweak.
Now, with each of these, you're going to look for a compromise between accurate physics or efficient
frame rate.
So we're able to tweak these and they're going to be doing calculations still, but maybe less often
or more often than before.
So just with those tweaks, these are some values that I fooled around with ahead of time and I got
some good results.
So let's take a look.
I'm going to run here.
And give it a play.
So this is making a huge difference.
I think in this case, this is really the key.
We could probably do only this change and an undo those other ones.
Previously, we're up to 80, 80 some frames a second.
So we've met our target of 60, which is fantastic.
So again, if you look at the documentation for those two properties, you can learn a little bit more
about what they do and why you can tweak them.
And depending on your project, maybe you can't tweak them exactly as as extremely as I did.
You might need the accuracy there.
Then a couple of other things that I try that didn't really help me out.
There's some physics settings that you can set here and setting them, and maybe the values I've chosen
didn't really give me a good difference.
So I'm not going to bring those into the party of this conversation, but just know that there are some
other values tweak.
And lastly, there is something in the settings called Adaptive Force.
I'll give that a try.
In physics Project settings Physics enable adaptive force.
Oh, it's already enabled actually in our demo here.
So it is enables the force which improves the stability of large stacks.
So stability sounds like maybe it's better result but more slow because I imagine there's a calculation
there.
Let's turn it off and let's see if we get worse Performance.
We're better performance.
Or maybe it'll be the same.
So we're looking good.
Before.
Yeah, I would say that this is better now.
So not having the adaptive feature on is better.
It's hard to tell because as we let this play, there's more complexity in the scene.
So it's not scientific the way that we're just looking at the frame rate here and doing a visual gauge.
But overall we see that we've gotten much better performance than we had before.
Now.
And of course, we're with 20,000 objects.
So it's good in your game, too, if you're experiencing some frame rate problems, maybe complicate
the issue with more obstacles, more levels in your level design.
See if you can make it slower then these each of these little changes will make a more dramatic frame
rate change and then you'll understand.
Okay, this feature helps.
This feature doesn't.
Then when you remove the complexity, you're back to a frame rate that's more stable and again, that
represents the game that you want there.
So that's it.
You can also take a look at the optimized physics complete scene to see the exact same end result.
But just as you're experimenting, if you want to jump in, play around and then compare yourself,
you can do that.
So that's it.
Thanks very much.
In the next video, we'll take a look at predicting physics trajectory.